All right.
Welcome back to this new module in this module, we're going to be learning about databases.
So I think the first thing that's in order here is to discuss what is a database.
I'm sure a lot of you have heard the term before.
I've referred to it throughout this course here and there.
But now let's take a deeper dive into what databases are and why they're so useful for software development.
So the easiest way for me to explain what a database is is probably to start with another tool that
we've already been working with throughout this course.
And that is a spreadsheet.
So I've got our trusty spreadsheet open here with a small sample of our people data set because it's
data that we're pretty familiar with.
So as we've already seen in this course, we can use a spreadsheet to open up fairly large sets of data.
And in that data, we have rows, right?
Like each of these rows here, I'll highlight one, right?
So we've got these rows and we can consider these rows to be records and each row or record has columns.
So these header fields that we have here like name, prefix, first name, so on and so forth.
These are columns or fields of the records, and we've seen that we can group data in the spreadsheet,
which we did back in the Streams API module.
We can sort or order the rows by some fields as well, right?
So we can perform aggregated mathematical functions on data, in particular columns.
So at one point, we added up all of the salaries.
We were also able to get the average salary we could find the maximum or the minimum salary.
Things like that can all be done in a spreadsheet, so you can think of a database somewhat similarly
to a very special type of spreadsheet.
However, there are some major differences.
First off, typically speaking, spreadsheets can only be opened up and used by one person at a time.
That is their primary use case.
However, databases, when used by programmers, are typically intended to be used by multiple programs
or multiple people simultaneously.
So that's one typical difference.
Additionally, spreadsheets are much more limited in the amount of data they can handle at any one given
time.
And typically, that limitation may have a lot to do with either how much memory is in a computer or
how much data you can squeeze into one file, which would be your spreadsheet file.
But most professional level databases do not have these same types of restrictions.
Databases specialize in handling massive amounts of data in the form of records and in terms of the
number of columns you can have per record as well.
And actually, even going further than that, what we're looking at here in the spreadsheet is just
one table.
But databases can also typically contain numerous tables, and you can relate the data from one table
to another table as long as they have some data in common between them.
Now there are actually several types of databases in common use today.
The most popular type and probably the oldest type of database is called a relational database, and
relational databases are probably most similar to what you see here with a spreadsheet in that you have
records with columns and forming tables, and then you can have multiple tables and then those tables
can relate to each other.
There are other types of databases, though, that are not table and relationally based, as we see
with a typical spreadsheet.
A couple other popular types of databases are object databases and no sequel databases.
Object databases actually have a lot in common with what we've been doing in our Java code, because
in our Java code, we tend to create classes.
And then from those classes, we create objects.
If I were a typical Java applications were connecting to an object database.
We could create these objects like the people objects that we've been creating, for example.
And then we could save those objects directly into an object database and retrieve them back out, basically
in the same form that they were in when we put them in.
Whereas with relational databases and some other types of translation typically has to be done by us,
the programmer to translate our objects from Java objects into something that's usually a little more
flat, like what we see here in this spreadsheet.
All right.
So now let's talk a little bit about how databases work and how they are usually connected to our applications.
So first off, a database can be thought of as a few different things, and you'll tend to hear the
term database used in a few different contexts.
So first off, at its most basic level, a database is really just a computer program.
It's a specialized program that knows how to take in and return massive amounts of data.
These applications actually have to be installed on a computer.
Somewhat similarly to how any other application might be installed on a computer.
However, unlike our spreadsheet here, which is an application that is meant to be used with a graphical
interface for a human to interact with it, database applications usually don't come with a graphical
user interface for users to be able to interact with the data.
That's not what their real purpose is.
Instead, they specialize in taking in a lot of data and returning that data, typically to other programs,
which are called database clients.
Now, those clients may in turn present users with a graphical interface, or they may not.
They may just process the data and then do something with it.
So these database applications are installed on computers now for most business purposes.
Those computers are often dedicated computers that primarily specialize in running just the database
software and typically computers that are used in that way are referred to as servers.
Now, if you've got a server that is primarily or exclusively only running a database application,
then it is common to hear the server itself referred to as the database.
And that's why I say the term database can be used somewhat interchangeably in the business world.
It could refer to the database software that is installed on a computer, as well as the computer itself,
especially when the computer is only running the database software.
We will refer to the entire computer or server as the database or a database server.
Additionally, these computers or servers will typically be set up on a network so that they can be
interacted with by other computers on the same network.
These other computers that may connect to the database would be considered clients, and from this we
get a common computing pattern called client server.
The clients may request data from the server and then the server by way of the database application
will look up that data.
Typically records if it's a relational database and return those records to the client, the client
can then process those records or display them on the screen for a user to interact with or any other
thing like that with this type of client server architecture.
It is possible to allow tens, hundreds, thousands or even millions of individual users to access and
interact with the same set of data hosted on just one database server.
It is also possible, though, to group a set of database servers together into what is called a cluster,
thereby enabling the cluster to act as one really massive, even larger virtual database server, which
can serve even more simultaneous users.
So to recap, databases are applications and servers that are specialized at storing and retrieving
massive amounts of data, at least relative to spreadsheets.
We're talking millions or billions of records with very rapid access times on the order of milliseconds
or even nanoseconds.
They're also really great any time multiple users might need access to the same shared data.